So, we have seen two intuitive sorting algorithms;
selection sort, and insertion sort, but unfortunately
for us, both of then turn out to be order
n square.
And we know that order n square is not really
good enough for sorting large arrays.
So, what can we do instead?
So, here is one way to sort an array more
effectively.
So, suppose we divide the array into two equal
parts.
So, we just break it in the middle, we look
at the left separately and the right separately.
Now assume that we can sort the left and right
into independently sorted halves.
So, we have the left half sorted, the right
half sorted.
Now if there is a way to combine the two halves
efficiently to get a fully sorted array, then
we can say that we have achieved the sorting
by breaking it up into two smaller sub problems
and combining the result.
So, let us first look at this combining step.
So, we are given two sorted lists A and B
or two sorted arrays A and B, and we want
to combine them into a single sorted list.
So, this is something that we can easily do.
Supposing we have two stacks of cards in front
of us.
Each of them is arranged in the same way in
ascending order.
Then what we will do is we will look at the
top most cards in each stack, and take the
smaller of the two, and move it to a new stack.
And we could keep doing this, until eventually
we have moved all the elements into a new
sorted stack.
So, this is intuitively merging.
So, I have two stacks.
So, I have two stacks of cards, right.
So, I look at the top most card in each, and
then one of them goes to a new stack.
And then this is gone and so now I will look
at the next value, and compare it with this,
and then one of these goes here and so on.
So, eventually I build up a new stack of sorted
list.
So, let us look at this in a very simple example.
So, supposing we want to merge these two sorted
lists.
So, this is sorted in ascending order and
so is this sorted in ascending order.
So, the first step, is to look at the top
most.
So, let us assuming that in terms of top most
these are written like this.
So, I have this stack, and I have this stack.
So, I look at the top most elements, and then
I say that the smaller of the two must be
the top most element of my new stack.
So, in this case I take 21 out, and I move
it here.
Now I have to compare, what is the top most
elements in the two stacks; can be 32 and
55.
So, now, I compare the smaller of the 2 as
32 and move it out.
Now I compare 55 and 74, and so 55 moves out,
and I compare 74 and 64.
So, now 64 move out.
Now I have nothing left in the second stack,
so the first stack is in sorted order, so
I just copy it out in order.
So, first I moves 74 and then I move 89.
So, this is a very intuitively merging thing
that we do again quite naturally when we are
dealing with physically two sorted lists,
and we can do it with a normal array as well.
So, now, how do we use this to sort.
As we said our aim is to break up problem
into two equal sub problems.
Solve the sub problems, and there merge the
two solution into a final solution.
So, we will sort A 0 to A n by 2 A n by 2
n minus 1 to make it distinct.
So, we have A with indices 0 to n minus 1.
So, we take n by 2 minus 1 and n by 2 as the
midpoint.
So, we sort this separately, we sort this
separately, and then we merge them.
So, this is the strategy that we have, and
this is since the final step involves merging
two solutions.
This is quite naturally called merge sort.
Now I have said that we will break up the
thing into two sub problems.
So, how do I solve this.
Well I will recursively do the same thing.
I will break this up into two sub problems,
and I will merge this.
I will break this up into two sub problems
and merge this.
So, you keep breaking up the thing into sub
problems, until you reach a trivial sub problem,
which is as we have seen, which is an array
of size of 1.
So, let us look at an example before we proceed.
So, here is an example of an array that we
would like to sort.
So, the first step is to break it up into
two parts.
So, we take the left part.
So, this is a midpoint.
So, we take the left part, which is the first
four elements, and the right part.
And now we will apply merge sort separately
to these part; finally, we will merge the
answer.
So, having applying merge sort to the left
part, you must again break it up into two
parts.
I will have to take this point and divide
it into two parts.
And similarly on the right, I will have to
take this point, and divide it into two parts.
Now we could say that we can easily do arrays
of size two, but let us just keep going till
we reach the base case.
The base case is when we have only one element
and no sorting is required.
We will against split each of these into two
parts.
So, notice that for convenience we have taken
something where I can keep dividing by 2,
but there is no limitation in merge sort,
it will work for any size.
At some point when you do an unequal’s split,
the two halves will not be the same size,
but that does not really matter.
Now we break the last step into two parts.
So, 43 is now.
So, this is in green to indicate that this
is now a single element and hence sorted,
so is this.
And in the same way we can take each of these
last steps and get now 8 single elements,
which are sorted.
Now we start merging.
So, we want to merge these two, in order to
sort, and similarly we want to merge these
two.
We want to merge these two, and we want to
merge these two.
So, we merge first two, and then we merge
this, the smaller one goes first.
So, this is now sorted.
Similarly we merge the second pair, it does
not change in order, because 22 is smaller
than 78.
We merge the third pair and they get exchanged,
and we merge the fourth pair again they get
exchanged.
There is an important note that exchange did
not come by looking at array of size 2 directly,
but rather by looking at these two value,
taking the smaller one first then the bigger
one.
Now I want to merge these two arrays into
a sorted segment of length 4, and these two
arrays into a sorted segment of length 4.
So, I again apply merging.
So, note that 22 will come first then 32 will
come here, then 43 will come here, and then
78 will come there.
If I apply this I will get 22 32 43 and 78.
The same way here 30 should come here, then
57, then 63, and then 91.
So, this is the effect of merging.
And finally, I have to merge these two.
So, the smallest one 13 will go here, then
I will get 22, then I will get 32, then I
will get 43, then I will get 57, then I will
get 63, and I will get 78, then I will get
91.
So, merging these two sub arrays of size four
will give me the final answer.
So, this is how merge sort works.
You break it up in two parts, recursively
solve two parts using the same strategy and
merge them.
So, this is generally a principle that can
be applied to many problems.
So, if you can take a problem, and divide
it into two or more parts; such that this
part can be solved independent of that part,
and there is no overlap.
You solve this separately, you solve this
separately, and now you want to somehow combine.
In this particular algorithm combination is
merging.
We will look later on at other divide and
conquer algorithms, where the combination
might require a different strategy, but the
whole idea is, that if you can break up the
problem into smaller problems, and then combine
them.
Then you can sometime get a lot of benefit
in terms of efficiency.
The crucial thing, is to identify how to break
up the problem into disjoin sub problems,
and how to combine the solution to these sub
problem efficiently to solve the problem at
hand.
So, let us come back to our merge sort and
try to formalize the algorithms in terms of
actual code.
So, how do I combine two sorted list or two
sorted arrays A and B into a third sorted
list C. Well as we saw if one of the two is
empty, then I do not have to do anything I
just have to copy the other one.
So if there is a no element left in A, then
I can just copy the rest of B into C.
If B is empty I can copy A into C; otherwise
we compare the first element of A and B and
move the smaller of the two into C, and we
repeat this until everything has been moved.
So, here is a simple iterative merge function.
So, it takes two arrays as input.
Takes an array A of size m.
So, 0 to m minus 1.
And takes an array B, which may be of different
size 0 to n minus 1, and the aim is to construct
a new array C. Now we know the size of C,
because everything there must come here.
So, it will be 0 to m plus n minus 1.
So, what we do is, we maintain some position.
So, we say that okay let i be the current
position I am looking at in this, j be the
current position I am looking at in B, and
k be the current position I am trying to fill
in C. So, now, we know that there are m plus
n steps.
So we put a loop which says this thing must
run m plus n times.
So, if we have already reached the end, if
j has already reached the end, or if A i is
smaller than B j.
So, this is the real merge step.
If A i is smaller or equal to B j what we
will do is, we will copy this value here,
and then we will increment i and we will increment
j.
So, we will move C k will be A i and i will
be incremented and k will be incremented.
But this also happens in case j is equal to
n.
If j is equal to n what it means is that,
this pointer has actually reached all way
there.
So, there nothing left to scan.
So, j is equal to n means it is actually beyond
the right point.
So, it is beyond the point.
So, there is nothing to scan.
So, we will just copy everything from A to
C. So, either we copy element, current element
from A to C if A i is smaller than B j or
if there is nothing in B, we copy the current
element, because we are just copying everything
from A to C. So, the symmetric case is, when
we have A i bigger then B j.
So, if A i is bigger than B j, then what we
want to do is, copy this value here.
So, we want to move j up and k up.
So, we copy C k is equal to B j, copy the
value at B j to C k, and increment both j
and k.
And like we did earlier, the other reason
we might want to do this is, if we have already
exceeded the length of.
So, if we are currently here.
So, A has been exhausted, then we would also
move the next element blindly from B to C.
So, this is a simple while loop right.
It takes exactly as many steps as there are
elements to move, and in each step I move
one more element to C; either from A or B
depending on the criterion on the current
element I am looking at.
So, having got merge out of the way.
Now, we can look at merge sort itself.
So, if we want to sort A of size n indices
0 to n minus 1.
We have to create a new array as we said,
because merging has to copy those two things
into a new thing.
So, we are eventually going to take A and
sort it into a new array B of the same size.
So, if n is 1.
If we have an element of size one, we have
the base case, nothing should be done.
Otherwise we will sort the left part into
a sub array L. We will sort right half into
a sub array R for left and right, and then
we will merge the two using function we just
wrote.
So, this is a very clear recursive algorithm.
So, we want to merge sort A from left to right.
So, we will assume that, when we say from
left to right, we mean that the left most
position is called left, and the right most
index is actually right minus 1.
So, this is actually one more then the index
of the position that we want to sort out.
So, we want to sort this segment, starting
at A left and going up to and including A
right minus 1.
So, first of all if this segment is of length
one, then we just copy the value into B.
We copy the value at A left.
Otherwise what we do is, we make, we find
the midpoint, and then we copy up to, but
not including mid.
So, this is why we use this convention that
it is up to mid minus 1.
So, this will be from A left to A mid minus
1, and this will merge sort from A mid to
A right minus 1.
So, what we want to makes sure is, that we
are not accidentally overlapping.
So, we want to make sure that the mid value
which appears in both things.
The value at A mid is only in none of them;
namely in the right hand side not in the left
hand side, so having done this.
Then I will use my earlier merge function,
to merge L, which is of size mid minus left,
and R which is of size right minus mid into
B. So, this is the function that we already
had.
So it is a very simple recursive thing.
Find the midpoint, sort the left half, sort
the right half and merge them.
As we said, it does not really matter that
A is of even length or it is a multiple of
two.
So, it might be that left half and the right
half are not of same length; one will be longer,
one will be shorter.
It does not really matter.
This works in all cases.
To analysis this, is not so straight forward,
so we will postpone that to the next module.